<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Origin of Species</i>, <abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 62 of first edition. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Nineteenth Century</i>, <abbr>Feb.</abbr> 1888, <abbr>p.</abbr> 165. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Leaving aside the pre-Darwinian writers, like Toussenel, Fée, and many others, several works containing many striking instances of mutual aid⁠—chiefly, however, illustrating animal intelligence were issued previously to that date. I may mention those of Houzeau, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les facultés etales des animaux</i>, 2 <abbr>vols.</abbr>, Brussels, 1872; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Büchner’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Aus dem Geistesleben der Thiere</i>, 2nd <abbr>ed.</abbr> in 1877; and Maximilian Perty’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Über das Seelenleben der Thiere</i>, Leipzig, 1876. Espinas published his most remarkable work, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les Sociétés animales</i>, in 1877, and in that work he pointed out the importance of animal societies, and their bearing upon the preservation of species, and entered upon a most valuable discussion of the origin of societies. In fact, Espinas’s book contains all that has been written since upon mutual aid, and many good things besides. If I nevertheless make a special mention of Kessler’s address, it is because he raised mutual aid to the height of a law much more important in evolution than the law of mutual struggle. The same ideas were developed next year (in April 1881) by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Lanessan in a lecture published in 1882 under this title: <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">La lutte pour l’existence et l’association pour la lutte</i>. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Romanes’s capital work, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Animal Intelligence</i>, was issued in 1882, and followed next year by the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mental Evolution in Animals</i>. About the same time (1883), Büchner published another work, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Liebe und Liebes-Leben in der Thierwelt</i>, a second edition of which was issued in 1885. The idea, as seen, was in the air. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs (Trudy) of the <abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg Society of Naturalists</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>, 1880. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<a href="appendix.xhtml#appendix-1">See Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>.</a>
						<a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>George <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Romanes’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Animal Intelligence</i>, 1st <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 233. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pierre Huber’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les fourmis indigees</i>, Génève, 1861; Forel’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Recherches sur les fourmis de la Suisse</i>, Zürich, 1874, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. T.</abbr> Moggridge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Harvesting Ants and Trapdoor Spiders</i>, London, 1873 and 1874, ought to be in the hands of every boy and girl. See also: Blanchard’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Métamorphoses des Insectes</i>, Paris, 1868; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. H.</abbr> Fabre’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Souvenirs entomologiques</i>, Paris, 1886; Ebrard’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Etudes des moeurs des fourmis</i>, Génève, 1864; Sir John Lubbock’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ants, Bees, and Wasps</i>, and so on. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Forel’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Recherches</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 244, 275, 278. Huber’s description of the process is admirable. It also contains a hint as to the possible origin of the instinct (popular edition, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 158, 160). <a href="appendix.xhtml#appendix-2">See Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>.</a> <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The agriculture of the ants is so wonderful that for a long time it has been doubted. The fact is now so well proved by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Moggridge, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Lincecum, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> MacCook, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Col.</abbr> Sykes, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Jerdon, that no doubt is possible. See an excellent summary of evidence in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Romanes’s work. See also <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Die Pilzgaerten einiger Süd-Amerikanischen Ameisen</i>, by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Alf.</abbr> Moeller, in Schimper’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de"><abbr>Botan.</abbr> <abbr>Mitth.</abbr> aus den Tropen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>, 1893. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This second principle was not recognized at once. Former observers often spoke of kings, queens, managers, and so on; but since Huber and Forel have published their minute observations, no doubt is possible as to the free scope left for every individual’s initiative in whatever the ants do, including their wars. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. W.</abbr> Bates, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Naturalist on the River Amazons</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, 59 <abbr>seq.</abbr> <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Syevertsoff, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Periodical Phenomena in the Life of Mammalia, Birds, and Reptiles of Voronèje</i>, Moscow, 1855 (in Russian). <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Brehm, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Animals</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, 477; all quotations after the French edition. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bates, <abbr>p.</abbr> 151. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Catalogue raisonné des oiseaux de la faune pontique</i>, in Demidoff’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Voyage</i>; abstracts in Brehm, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, 360. During their migrations birds of prey often associate. One flock, which <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Seebohm saw crossing the Pyrenees, represented a curious assemblage of “eight kites, one crane, and a peregrine falcon” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Birds of Siberia</i>, 1901, <abbr>p.</abbr> 417). <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Birds in the Northern Shires</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 207. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Max.</abbr> Perty, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Über das Seelenleben der Thiere</i> (Leipzig, 1876), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 87, 103. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> Gurney, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The House-Sparrow</i> (London, 1885), <abbr>p.</abbr> 5. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Elliot Couës, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Birds of the Kerguelen Island</i>, in Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 2, <abbr>p.</abbr> 11. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Brehm, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>, 567. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As to the house-sparrows, a New Zealand observer, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. W.</abbr> Kirk, described as follows the attack of these “impudent” birds upon an “unfortunate” hawk:⁠—“He heard one day a most unusual noise, as though all the small birds of the country had joined in one grand quarrel. Looking up, he saw a large hawk (<i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy"><abbr>C.</abbr> gouldi</i>⁠—a carrion feeder) being buffeted by a flock of sparrows. They kept dashing at him in scores, and from all points at once. The unfortunate hawk was quite powerless. At last, approaching some scrub, the hawk dashed into it and remained there, while the sparrows congregated in groups round the bush, keeping up a constant chattering and noise” (Paper read before the New Zealand Institute; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Nature</i>, <abbr>Oct.</abbr> 10, 1891). <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Brehm, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>, 671 <abbr>seq.</abbr> <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Lendenfeld, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Der zoologische Garten</i>, 1889. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Syevettsoff’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Periodical Phenomena</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 251. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Seyfferlitz, quoted by Brehm, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>, 760. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Arctic Voyages of <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. E.</abbr> Nordenskjold</i>, London, 1879, <abbr>p.</abbr> 135. See also the powerful description of the <abbr>St.</abbr> Kilda islands by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dixon (quoted by Seebohm), and nearly all books of Arctic travel. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<a href="appendix.xhtml#appendix-3">See Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>.</a>
						<a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Elliot Couës, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Bulletin <abbr epub:type="z3998:place">U.S.</abbr> <abbr>Geol.</abbr> Survey of Territories</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>, <abbr>no.</abbr> 7, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 556, 579, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Among the gulls (<i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Larus argentatus</i>), Polyakoff saw on a marsh in Northern Russia, that the nesting grounds of a very great number of these birds were always patrolled by one male, which warned the colony of the approach of danger. All birds rose in such case and attacked the enemy with great vigour. The females, which had five or six nests together on each knoll of the marsh, kept a certain order in leaving their nests in search of food. The fledglings, which otherwise are extremely unprotected and easily become the prey of the rapacious birds, were never left alone (“Family Habits among the Aquatic Birds,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of the <abbr>Zool.</abbr> Section of <abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg <abbr>Soc.</abbr> of <abbr>Nat.</abbr></i>, <abbr>Dec.</abbr> 17, 1874). <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Brehm Father, quoted by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Brehm, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>, 34 <abbr>seq.</abbr> See also White’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Natural History of Selborne</i>, Letter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Couës, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Birds of Dakota and Montana</i>, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Bulletin <abbr epub:type="z3998:place">U.S.</abbr> Survey of Territories</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>, <abbr>no.</abbr> 7. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It has often been intimated that larger birds may occasionally <em>transport</em> some of the smaller birds when they cross together the Mediterranean, but the fact still remains doubtful. On the other side, it is certain that some smaller birds join the bigger ones for migration. The fact has been noticed several times, and it was recently confirmed by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Buxbaum at Raunheim. He saw several parties of cranes which had larks flying in the midst and on both sides of their migratory columns (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Der zoologische Garten</i>, 1886, <abbr>p.</abbr> 133). <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Seebohm and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Ch.</abbr> Dixon both mention this habit. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The fact is well known to every field-naturalist, and with reference to England several examples may be found in Charles Dixon’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Among the Birds in Northern Shires</i>. The chaffinches arrive during winter in vast flocks; and about the same time, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> in November, come flocks of bramblings; redwings also frequent the same places “in similar large companies,” and so on (<abbr>pp.</abbr> 165, 166). <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S. W.</abbr> Baker, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Wild Beasts</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 316. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tschudi, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Thierleben der Alpenwelt</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 404. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Houzeau’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Études</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, 463. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For their hunting associations see Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Tennant’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Natural History of Ceylon</i>, quoted in Romanes’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Animal Intelligence</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 432. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Emil Huter’s letter in <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Büchner’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Liebe</i>. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-39" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<a href="appendix.xhtml#appendix-4">See Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>.</a>
						<a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-40" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With regard to the viscacha it is very interesting to note that these highly-sociable little animals not only live peaceably together in each village, but that whole villages visit each other at nights. Sociability is thus extended to the whole species⁠—not only to a given society, or to a nation, as we saw it with the ants. When the farmer destroys a viscacha-burrow, and buries the inhabitants under a heap of earth, other viscachas⁠—we are told by Hudson⁠—“come from a distance to dig out those that are buried alive” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Naturalist on the La Plata</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 311). This is a widely-known fact in La Plata, verified by the author. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-40" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-41" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Handbuch für Jäger und Jagdberechtigte</i>, quoted by Brehm, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, 223. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-41" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-42" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Buffon’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Histoire Naturelle</i>. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-42" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-43" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In connection with the horses it is worthy of notice that the quagga zebra, which never comes together with the dauw zebra, nevertheless lives on excellent terms, not only with ostriches, which are very good sentries, but also with gazelles, several species of antelopes, and gnus. We thus have a case of mutual dislike between the quagga and the dauw which cannot be explained by competition for food. The fact that the quagga lives together with ruminants feeding on the same grass as itself excludes that hypothesis, and we must look for some incompatibility of character, as in the case of the hare and the rabbit. <abbr>Cf.</abbr>, among others, Clive Phillips-Wolley’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Big Game Shooting</i> (Badminton Library), which contains excellent illustrations of various species living together in East Africa. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-43" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-44" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Our Tungus hunter, who was going to marry, and therefore was prompted by the desire of getting as many furs as he possibly could, was beating the hillsides all day long on horseback in search of deer. His efforts were not rewarded by even so much as one fallow deer killed every day; and he was an excellent hunter. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-44" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-45" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>According to Samuel <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Baker, elephants combine in larger groups than the “compound family.” “I have frequently observed,” he wrote, “in the portion of Ceylon known as the Park Country, the tracks of elephants in great numbers which have evidently been considerable herds that have joined together in a general retreat from a ground which they considered insecure” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Wild Beasts and Their Ways</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 102). <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-45" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-46" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pigs, attacked by wolves, do the same (Hudson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Naturalist on the La Plata</i>). <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-46" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-47" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Romanes’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Animal Intelligence</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 472. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-47" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-48" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Brehm, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 82; Darwin’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Descent of Man</i>, <abbr>ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. The Kozloff expedition of 1899⁠–⁠1901 have also had to sustain in Northern Tibet a similar fight. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-48" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-49" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The more strange was it to read in the previously-mentioned article by Huxley the following paraphrase of a well-known sentence of Rousseau: “The first men who substituted mutual peace for that of mutual war⁠—whatever the motive which impelled them to take that step⁠—<em>created society</em>” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Nineteenth Century</i>, <abbr>Feb.</abbr> 1888, <abbr>p.</abbr> 165). Society has <em>not</em> been created by man; it is anterior to man. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-49" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-50" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Such monographs as the chapter on “Music and Dancing in Nature” which we have in Hudson’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Naturalist on the La Plata</i>, and Carl Gross’ <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Play of Animals</i>, have already thrown a considerable light upon an instinct which is absolutely universal in Nature. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-50" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-51" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Not only numerous species of birds possess the habit of assembling together⁠—in many cases always at the same spot⁠—to indulge in antics and dancing performances, but <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Hudson’s experience is that nearly all mammals and birds (“probably there are really <em>no</em> exceptions”) indulge frequently in more or less regular or set performances with or without sound, or composed of sound exclusively (<abbr>p.</abbr> 264). <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-51" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-52" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For the choruses of monkeys, see Brehm. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-52" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-53" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Haygarth, Bush <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life in Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 58. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-53" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-54" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>To quote but a few instances, a wounded badger was carried away by another badger suddenly appearing on the scene; rats have been seen feeding a blind couple (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Seelenleben der Thiere</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 64 <abbr>seq.</abbr>). Brehm himself saw two crows feeding in a hollow tree a third crow which was wounded; its wound was several weeks old (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Hausfreund</i>, 1874, 715; Büchner’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Liebe</i>, 203). <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Blyth saw Indian crows feeding two or three blind comrades; and so on. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-54" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-55" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Man and Beast</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 344. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-55" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-56" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. H.</abbr> Morgan, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The American Beaver</i>, 1868, <abbr>p.</abbr> 272; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Descent of Man</i>, <abbr>ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-56" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-57" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>One species of swallow is said to have caused the decrease of another swallow species in North America; the recent increase of the missel-thrush in Scotland has caused the decrease of the song-thrush; the brown rat has taken the place of the black rat in Europe; in Russia the small cockroach has everywhere driven before it its greater congener; and in Australia the imported hive-bee is rapidly exterminating the small stingless bee. Two other cases, but relative to domesticated animals, are mentioned in the preceding paragraph. While recalling these same facts, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. R.</abbr> Wallace remarks in a footnote relative to the Scottish thrushes: “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Prof.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Newton, however, informs me that these species do not interfere in the way here stated” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Darwinism</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 34). As to the brown rat, it is known that, owing to its amphibian habits, it usually stays in the lower parts of human dwellings (low cellars, sewers, <abbr>etc.</abbr>), as also on the banks of canals and rivers; it also undertakes distant migrations in numberless bands. The black rat, on the contrary, prefers staying in our dwellings themselves, under the floor, as well as in our stables and barns. It thus is much more exposed to be exterminated by man; and we cannot maintain, with any approach to certainty, that the black rat is being either exterminated or starved out by the brown rat and not by man. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-57" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-58" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“But it may be urged that when several closely-allied species inhabit the same territory, we surely ought to find at the present time many transitional forms.⁠ ⁠… By my theory these allied species are descended from a common parent; and during the process of modification, each has become adapted to the conditions of life of its own region, and has supplanted and exterminated its original parent-form and all the transitional varieties between its past and present states” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Origin of Species</i>, 6th <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 134); also <abbr>p.</abbr> 137, 296 (all paragraph “On Extinction”). <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-58" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-59" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>According to Madame Marie Pavloff, who has made a special study of this subject, they migrated from Asia to Africa, stayed there some time, and returned next to Asia. Whether this double migration be confirmed or not, the fact of a former extension of the ancestor of our horse over Asia, Africa, and America is settled beyond doubt. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-59" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-60" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Naturalist on the River Amazons</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, 85, 95. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-60" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-61" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Altum, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Waldbeschadigungen durch Thiere und Gegenmittel</i> (Berlin, 1889), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 207 <abbr>seq.</abbr> <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-61" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-62" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Altum, <i xml:lang="la">ut supra</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 13 and 187. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-62" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-63" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Becker in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Bulletin de la Societe des Naturalistes de Moscou</i>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 625. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-63" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-64" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<a href="appendix.xhtml#appendix-5">See Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>.</a>
						<a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-64" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-65" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="ru-Latn">Russkaya Mysl</i>, <abbr>Sept.</abbr> 1888: “The Theory of Beneficency of Struggle for Life, being a Preface to various Treatises on Botanics, Zoology, and Human Life,” by an Old Transformist. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-65" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-66" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“One of the most frequent modes in which Natural Selection acts is, by adapting some individuals of a species to a somewhat different mode of life, whereby they are able to seize unappropriated places in Nature” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Origin of Species</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 145)⁠—in other words, to avoid competition. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-66" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-67" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<a href="appendix.xhtml#appendix-6">See Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>.</a>
						<a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-67" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-68" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Nineteenth Century</i>, February 1888, <abbr>p.</abbr> 165. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-68" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-69" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Descent of Man</i>, end of <abbr>ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 63 and 64 of the 2nd edition. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-69" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-70" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Anthropologists who fully endorse the above views as regards man nevertheless intimate, sometimes, that the apes live in polygamous families, under the leadership of “a strong and jealous male.” I do not know how far that assertion is based upon conclusive observation. But the passage from Brehm’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Animals</i>, which is sometimes referred to, can hardly be taken as very conclusive. It occurs in his general description of monkeys; but his more detailed descriptions of separate species either contradict it or do not confirm it. Even as regards the cercopitheques, Brehm is affirmative in saying that they “nearly always live in bands, and very seldom in families” (French edition, <abbr>p.</abbr> 59). As to other species, the very numbers of their bands, always containing many males, render the “polygamous family” more than doubtful further observation is evidently wanted. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-70" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-71" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lubbock, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Prehistoric Times</i>, fifth edition, 1890. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-71" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-72" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>That extension of the icecap is admitted by most of the geologists who have specially studied the glacial age. The Russian Geological Survey already has taken this view as regards Russia, and most German specialists maintain it as regards Germany. The glaciation of most of the central plateau of France will not fail to be recognized by the French geologists, when they pay more attention to the glacial deposits altogether. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-72" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-73" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Prehistoric Times</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 232 and 242. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-73" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-74" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bachofen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Das Mutterrecht</i>, Stuttgart, 1861; Lewis <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Morgan, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ancient Society, or Researches in the Lines of Human Progress from Savagery Through Barbarism to Civilization</i>, New York, 1877; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. F.</abbr> MacLennan, Studies in Ancient History, 1st series, new edition, 1886; 2nd series, 1896; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Fison and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Kamilaroi and Kurnai</i>, Melbourne. These four writers⁠—as has been very truly remarked by Giraud Teulon⁠—starting from different facts and different general ideas, and following different methods, have come to the same conclusion. To Bachofen we owe the notion of the maternal family and the maternal succession; to Morgan⁠—the system of kinship, Malayan and Turanian, and a highly gifted sketch of the main phases of human evolution; to MacLennan⁠—the law of exogeny; and to Fison and Howitt⁠—the <i xml:lang="und">cuadro</i>, or scheme, of the conjugal societies in Australia. All four end in establishing the same fact of the tribal origin of the family. When Bachofen first drew attention to the maternal family, in his epoch-making work, and Morgan described the clan-organization⁠—both concurring to the almost general extension of these forms and maintaining that the marriage laws lie at the very basis of the consecutive steps of human evolution, they were accused of exaggeration. However, the most careful researches prosecuted since, by a phalanx of students of ancient law, have proved that all races of mankind bear traces of having passed through similar stages of development of marriage laws, such as we now see in force among certain savages. See the works of Post, Dargun, Kovalevsky, Lubbock, and their numerous followers: Lippert, Mucke, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-74" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-75" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<a href="appendix.xhtml#appendix-7">See Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>.</a>
						<a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-75" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-76" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For the Semites and the Aryans, see especially <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Prof.</abbr> Maxim Kovalevsky’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Primitive Law</i> (in Russian), Moscow, 1886 and 1887. Also his lectures delivered at Stockholm (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Tableau des origines et de l’evolution de la famille et de la propriété</i>, Stockholm, 1890), which represents an admirable review of the whole question. <abbr>Cf.</abbr> also <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Post, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Die Geschlechtsgenossenschaft der Urzeit</i>, Oldenburg, 1875. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-76" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-77" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It would be impossible to enter here into a discussion of the origin of the marriage restrictions. Let me only remark that a division into groups, similar to Morgan’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Hawaiian</i>, exists among birds; the young broods live together separately from their parents. A like division might probably be traced among some mammals as well. As to the prohibition of relations between brothers and sisters, it is more likely to have arisen, not from speculations about the bad effects of consanguinity, which speculations really do not seem probable, but to avoid the too-easy precocity of like marriages. Under close cohabitation it must have become of imperious necessity. I must also remark that in discussing the origin of new customs altogether, we must keep in mind that the savages, like us, have their “thinkers” and savants-wizards, doctors, prophets, <abbr>etc.</abbr>⁠—whose knowledge and ideas are in advance upon those of the masses. United as they are in their secret unions (another almost universal feature) they are certainly capable of exercising a powerful influence, and of enforcing customs the utility of which may not yet be recognized by the majority of the tribe. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-77" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-78" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Col.</abbr> Collins, in Philips’ <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Researches in South Africa</i>, London, 1828. Quoted by Waitz, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, 334. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-78" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-79" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lichtenstein’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Reisen im südlichen Afrika</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 92, 97. Berlin, 1811. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-79" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-80" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Waitz, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Anthropologie der Naturvölker</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 335 <abbr>seq.</abbr> See also Fritsch’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Die Eingeboren Afrika’s</i>, Breslau, 1872, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 386 <abbr>seq.</abbr>; and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Drei Jahre in Süd-Afrika</i>. Also <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Bleck, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Brief Account of Bushmen Folklore</i>, Capetown, 1875. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-80" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-81" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Elisée Reclus, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Géographie Universelle</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>, 475. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-81" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-82" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Kolben, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Present State of the Cape of Good Hope</i>, translated from the German by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Medley, London, 1731, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 59, 71, 333, 336, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-82" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-83" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Quoted in Waitz’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Anthropologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, 335 <abbr>seq.</abbr> <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-83" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-84" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The natives living in the north of Sidney, and speaking the Kamilaroi language, are best known under this aspect, through the capital work of Lorimer Fison and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Kamilaroi and Kurnaii</i>, Melbourne, 1880. See also <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt’s “Further Note on the Australian Class Systems,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, 1889, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 31, showing the wide extension of the same organization in Australia. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-84" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-85" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Folklore, Manners, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, of Australian Aborigines</i>, Adelaide, 1879, <abbr>p.</abbr> 11. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-85" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-86" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Grey’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journals of Two Expeditions of Discovery in Northwest and Western Australia</i>, London, 1841, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 237, 298. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-86" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-87" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin de la Société d’Anthropologie</i>, 1888, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 652. I abridge the answers. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-87" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-88" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin de la Société d’Anthropologie</i>, 1888, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 386. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-88" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-89" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The same is the practice with the Papuas of Kaimani Bay, who have a high reputation of honesty. “It never happens that the Papua be untrue to his promise,” Finsch says in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Neuguinea und seine Bewohner</i>, Bremen, 1865, <abbr>p.</abbr> 829. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-89" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-90" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="ru-Latn">Izvestia</i> of the Russian Geographical Society, 1880, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 161 <abbr>seq.</abbr> Few books of travel give a better insight into the petty details of the daily life of savages than these scraps from Maklay’s notebooks. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-90" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-91" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. F.</abbr> Martial, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Mission Scientifique au Cap Horn</i>, Paris, 1883, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 183⁠–⁠201. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-91" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-92" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Captain Holm’s Expedition to East Greenland. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-92" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-93" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Australia whole clans have been seen exchanging all their wives, in order to conjure a calamity (Post, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Studien zur Entwicklungsgeschichte des Familienrechts</i>, 1890, <abbr>p.</abbr> 342). More brotherhood is their specific against calamities. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-93" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-94" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Rink, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Eskimo Tribes</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 26 (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Meddelelser om Grönland</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>, 1887). <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-94" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-95" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Rink, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Eskimo Tribes</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 24. Europeans, grown in the respect of Roman law, are seldom capable of understanding that force of tribal authority. “In fact,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Rink writes, “it is not the exception, but the rule, that white men who have stayed for ten or twenty years among the Eskimo, return without any real addition to their knowledge of the traditional ideas upon which their social state is based. The white man, whether a missionary or a trader, is firm in his dogmatic opinion that the most vulgar European is better than the most distinguished native.” <cite>—⁠<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Eskimo Tribes</i></cite>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 31. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-95" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-96" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dall, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Alaska and Its Resources</i>, Cambridge, <abbr epub:type="z3998:place">U.S.</abbr>, 1870. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-96" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-97" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dall saw it in Alaska, Jacobsen at Ignitok in the vicinity of the Bering Strait. Gilbert Sproat mentions it among the Vancouver Indians; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Rink, who describes the periodical exhibitions just mentioned, adds: “The principal use of the accumulation of personal wealth is for <em>periodically</em> distributing it.” He also mentions (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Eskimo Tribes</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 31) “the destruction of property for the same purpose,” (of maintaining equality). <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-97" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-98" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<a href="appendix.xhtml#appendix-8">See Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>.</a>
						<a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-98" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-99" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Veniaminoff, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs Relative to the District of Unalashka</i> (Russian), 3 <abbr>vols.</abbr> <abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, 1840. Extracts, in English, from the above are given in Dall’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Alaska</i>. A like description of the Australians’ morality is given in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Nature</i>, xlii. <abbr>p.</abbr> 639. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-99" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-100" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is most remarkable that several writers (Middendorff, Schrenk, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Finsch) described the Ostyaks and Samoyedes in almost the same words. Even when drunken, their quarrels are insignificant. “For a hundred years one single murder has been committed in the tundra;” “their children never fight;” “anything may be left for years in the tundra, even food and gin, and nobody will touch it;” and so on. Gilbert Sproat “<em>never</em> witnessed a fight between two sober natives” of the Aht Indians of Vancouver Island. “Quarrelling is also rare among their children.” (Rink, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Eskimo Tribes</i>.) And so on. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-100" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-101" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Gill, quoted in Gerland and Waitz’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Anthropologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>, 641. See also <abbr>pp.</abbr> 636⁠–⁠640, where many facts of parental and filial love are quoted. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-101" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-102" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Primitive Folk</i>, London, 1891. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-102" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-103" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Gerland, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Anthropologie</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>, 636. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-103" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-104" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Erskine, quoted in Gerland and Waitz’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Anthropologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>, 640. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-104" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-105" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. T.</abbr> Pritchard, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Polynesian Reminiscences</i>, London, 1866, <abbr>p.</abbr> 363. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-105" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-106" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is remarkable, however, that in case of a sentence of death, nobody will take upon himself to be the executioner. Everyone throws his stone, or gives his blow with the hatchet, carefully avoiding to give a mortal blow. At a later epoch, the priest will stab the victim with a sacred knife. Still later, it will be the king, until civilization invents the hired hangman. See Bastian’s deep remarks upon this subject in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Der Mensch in der Geschichte</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Die Blutrache</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 1⁠–⁠36. A remainder of this tribal habit, I am told by Professor <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Nys, has survived in military executions till our own times. In the middle portion of the nineteenth century it was the habit to load the rifles of the twelve soldiers called out for shooting the condemned victim, with eleven ball-cartridges and one blank cartridge. As the soldiers never knew who of them had the latter, each one could console his disturbed conscience by thinking that he was not one of the murderers. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-106" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-107" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Africa, and elsewhere too, it is a widely-spread habit, that if a theft has been committed, the next clan has to restore the equivalent of the stolen thing, and then look itself for the thief. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. H.</abbr> Post, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Afrikanische Jurisprudenz</i>, Leipzig, 1887, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 77. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-107" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-108" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Prof.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Kovalevsky’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Modern Customs and Ancient Law</i> (Russian), Moscow, 1886, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, which contains many important considerations upon this subject. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-108" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-109" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Carl Bock, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Head Hunters of Borneo</i>, London, 1881. I am told, however, by Sir Hugh Law, who was for a long time Governor of Borneo, that the “headhunting” described in this book is grossly exaggerated. Altogether, my informant speaks of the Dayaks in exactly the same sympathetic terms as Ida Pfeiffer. Let me add that Mary Kingsley speaks in her book on West Africa in the same sympathetic terms of the Fans, who had been represented formerly as the most “terrible cannibals.” <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-109" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-110" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ida Pfeiffer, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Meine zweite Weltriese</i>, Wien, 1856, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 116 <abbr>seq.</abbr> See also Muller and Temminch’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dutch Possessions in Archipelagic India</i>, quoted by Elisée Reclus, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Géographie Universelle</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-110" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-111" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Descent of Man</i>, second <abbr>ed.</abbr>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 63, 64. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-111" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-112" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Bastian’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Mensch in der Geschichte</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 7. Also Grey, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journals of Two Expeditions of Discovery in Northwest and Western Australia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 238. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-112" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-113" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miklukho-Maclay, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Mensch in der Geschichte</i>. Same habit with the Hottentots. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-113" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-114" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Numberless traces of post-pliocene lakes, now disappeared, are found over Central, West, and North Asia. Shells of the same species as those now found in the Caspian Sea are scattered over the surface of the soil as far East as halfway to Lake Aral, and are found in recent deposits as far north as Kazan. Traces of Caspian Gulfs, formerly taken for old beds of the Amu, intersect the Turcoman territory. Deduction must surely be made for temporary, periodical oscillations. But with all that, desiccation is evident, and it progresses at a formerly unexpected speed. Even in the relatively wet parts of Southwest Siberia, the succession of reliable surveys, recently published by Yadrintseff, shows that villages have grown up on what was, eighty years ago, the bottom of one of the lakes of the Tchany group; while the other lakes of the same group, which covered hundreds of square miles some fifty years ago, are now mere ponds. In short, the desiccation of Northwest Asia goes on at a rate which must be measured by centuries, instead of by the geological units of time of which we formerly used to speak. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-114" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-115" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Whole civilizations had thus disappeared, as is proved now by the remarkable discoveries in Mongolia on the Orkhon and in the Lukchun depression (by Dmitri Clements). <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-115" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-116" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>If I follow the opinions of (to name modern specialists only) Nasse, Kovalevsky, and Vinogradov, and not those of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Seebohm (<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Denman Ross can only be named for the sake of completeness), it is not only because of the deep knowledge and concordance of views of these three writers, but also on account of their perfect knowledge of the village community altogether⁠—a knowledge the want of which is much felt in the otherwise remarkable work of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Seebohm. The same remark applies, in a still higher degree, to the most elegant writings of Fustel de Coulanges, whose opinions and passionate interpretations of old texts are confined to himself. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-116" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-117" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The literature of the village community is so vast that but a few works can be named. Those of Sir Henry Maine, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Seebohm, and Walter’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Das alte Wallis</i> (Bonn, 1859), are well-known popular sources of information about Scotland, Ireland, and Wales. For France, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Viollet, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Précis de l’histoire du droit français: Droit privé</i>, 1886, and several of his monographs in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr"><abbr>Bibl.</abbr> de l’École des Chartes</i>; Babeau, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le Village sous l’ancien régime</i> (the <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">mir</i> in the eighteenth century), third edition, 1887; Bonnemère, Doniol, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> For Italy and Scandinavia, the chief works are named in Laveleye’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Primitive Property</i>, German version by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Bücher. For the Finns, Rein’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Föreläsningar</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 16; Koskinen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Finnische Geschichte</i>, 1874, and various monographs. For the Lives and Coures, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Prof.</abbr> Lutchitzky in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="ru-Latn">Severnyi Vestnik</i>, 1891. For the Teutons, besides the well-known works of Maurer, Sohm (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Altdeutsche Reichs- und Gerichts-Verfassung</i>), also Dahn (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Urzeit, Völkerwanderung, Langobardische Studien</i>), Janssen, Wilh. Arnold, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> For India, besides <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Maine and the works he names, Sir John Phear’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aryan Village</i>. For Russia and South Slavonians, see Kavelin, Posnikoff, Sokolovsky, Kovalevsky, Efimenko, Ivanisheff, Klaus, <abbr>etc.</abbr> (copious bibliographical index up to 1880 in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="ru-Latn">Sbornik svedeniy ob obschinye</i> of the <abbr>Russ.</abbr> <abbr>Geog.</abbr> <abbr>Soc.</abbr>). For general conclusions, besides Laveleye’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Propriété</i>, Morgan’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ancient Society</i>, Lippert’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Kulturgeschichte</i>, Post, Dargun, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, also the lectures of <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Kovalevsky (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Tableau des origines et de l’evolution de la famille et de la propriété</i>, Stockholm, 1890). Many special monographs ought to be mentioned; their titles may be found in the excellent lists given by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Viollet in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Droit privé</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Droit public</i>. For other races, see subsequent notes. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-117" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-118" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Several authorities are inclined to consider the joint household as an intermediate stage between the clan and the village community; and there is no doubt that in very many cases village communities have grown up out of undivided families. Nevertheless, I consider the joint household as a fact of a different order. We find it within the <i xml:lang="la">gentes</i>; on the other hand, we cannot affirm that joint families have existed at any period without belonging either to a <i xml:lang="la">gens</i> or to a village community, or to a <i xml:lang="und">Gau</i>. I conceive the early village communities as slowly originating directly from the <i xml:lang="la">gentes</i>, and consisting, according to racial and local circumstances, either of several joint families, or of both joint and simple families, or (especially in the case of new settlements) of simple families only. If this view be correct, we should not have the right of establishing the series: <i xml:lang="la">gens</i>, compound family, village community⁠—the second member of the series having not the same ethnological value as the two others. <a href="appendix.xhtml#appendix-9">See Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>.</a> <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-118" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-119" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Stobbe, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Beitrëg zur Geschichte des deutschen Rechtes</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 62. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-119" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-120" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The few traces of private property in land which are met with in the early barbarian period are found with such stems (the Batavians, the Franks in Gaul) as have been for a time under the influence of Imperial Rome. See Inama-Sternegg’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Die Ausbildung der grossen Grundherrschaften in Deutschland</i>, <abbr>Bd.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1878. Also, Besseler, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Neubruch nach dem älteren deutschen Recht</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 11⁠–⁠12, quoted by Kovalevsky, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Modern Custom and Ancient Law</i>, Moscow, 1886, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 134. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-120" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-121" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Maurer’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Markgenossenschaft</i>; Lamprecht’s “<i xml:lang="de">Wirthschaft und Recht der Franken zur Zeit der Volksrechte</i>,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Historisches Taschenbuch</i>, 1883; Seebohm’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The English Village Community</i>, <abbr>ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>, and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-121" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-122" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Letourneau, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Bulletin de la <abbr>Soc.</abbr> d’Anthropologie</i>, 1888, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 476. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-122" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-123" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Walter, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Das alte Wallis</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 323; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Dm.</abbr> Bakradze and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Khoudadoff in Russian <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="ru-Latn">Zapiski</i> of the Caucasian <abbr>Geogr.</abbr> Society, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>, Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-123" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-124" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bancroft’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Races</i>; Waitz, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Anthropologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, 423; Montrozier, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr"><abbr>Bull.</abbr> <abbr>Soc.</abbr> d’Anthropologie</i>, 1870; Post’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Studien</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-124" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-125" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A number of works, by Ory, Luro, Laudes, and Sylvestre, on the village community in Annam, proving that it has had there the same forms as in Germany or Russia, is mentioned in a review of these works by Jobbé-Duval, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Nouvelle Revue historique de droit français et étranger</i>, October and December, 1896. A good study of the village community of Peru, before the establishment of the power of the Incas, has been brought out by Heinrich Cunow (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Die Soziale Verfassung des Inka-Reichs</i>, Stuttgart, 1896.) The communal possession of land and communal culture are described in that work. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-125" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-126" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Kovalevsky, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Modern Custom and Ancient Law</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 115. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-126" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-127" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Palfrey, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of New England</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, 13; quoted in Maine’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Village Communities</i>, New York, 1876, <abbr>p.</abbr> 201. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-127" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-128" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Königswarter, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Études sur le développement des sociétés humaines</i>, Paris, 1850. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-128" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-129" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is, at least, the law of the Kalmucks, whose customary law bears the closest resemblance to the laws of the Teutons, the old Slavonians, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-129" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-130" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The habit is in force still with many African and other tribes. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-130" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-131" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Village Communities</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 65⁠–⁠68 and 199. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-131" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-132" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Maurer (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de"><abbr>Gesch.</abbr> der Markverfassung</i>, sections 29, 97) is quite decisive upon this subject. He maintains that “All members of the community⁠ ⁠… the laic and clerical lords as well, often also the partial co-possessors (<i xml:lang="de">Markberechtigte</i>), and even strangers to the Mark, were submitted to its jurisdiction” (<abbr>p.</abbr> 312). This conception remained locally in force up to the fifteenth century. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-132" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-133" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Königswarter, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Études sur le développement des sociétés humaines</i>, Paris, 1850, <abbr>p.</abbr> 50; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Thrupp, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Historical Law Tracts</i>, London, 1843, <abbr>p.</abbr> 106. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-133" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-134" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Königswarter has shown that the <i xml:lang="cy">fred</i> originated from an offering which had to be made to appease the ancestors. Later on, it was paid to the community, for the breach of peace; and still later to the judge, or king, or lord, when they had appropriated to themselves the rights of the community. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-134" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-135" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Post’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Bausteine and Afrikanische Jurisprudenz</i>, Oldenburg, 1887, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 64 <abbr>seq.</abbr>; Kovalevsky, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Modern Custom and Ancient Law</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, 164⁠–⁠189. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-135" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-136" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Miller and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Kovalevsky, “In the Mountaineer Communities of Kabardia,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="ru-Latn">Vestnik Evropy</i>, April, 1884. With the Shakhsevens of the Mugan Steppe, blood feuds always end by marriage between the two hostile sides (Markoff, in appendix to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="ru-Latn">Zapiski</i> of the Caucasian <abbr>Geogr.</abbr> <abbr>Soc.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>, 1, 21). <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-136" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-137" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Post, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de"><abbr>Afrik.</abbr> Jurisprudenz</i>, gives a series of facts illustrating the conceptions of equity inrooted among the African barbarians. The same may be said of all serious examinations into barbarian common law. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-137" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-138" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the excellent chapter, “<i xml:lang="fr">Le droit de La Vieille Irlande</i>,” (also “<i xml:lang="fr">Le Haut Nord</i>”) in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Études de droit international et de droit politique</i>, by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Prof.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Nys, Bruxelles, 1896. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-138" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-139" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><a href="introduction.xhtml">Introduction</a>, <abbr>p.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxv</span>. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-139" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-140" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Das alte Wallis</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 343⁠–⁠350. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-140" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-141" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Maynoff, “Sketches of the Judicial Practices of the Mordovians,” in the ethnographical <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="ru-Latn">Zapiski</i> of the Russian Geographical Society, 1885, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 236, 257. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-141" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-142" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Henry Maine, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">International Law</i>, London, 1888, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 11⁠–⁠13. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Nys, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les origines du droit international</i>, Bruxelles, 1894. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-142" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-143" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A Russian historian, the Kazan Professor Schapoff, who was exiled in 1862 to Siberia, has given a good description of their institutions in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="ru-Latn">Izvestia</i> of the East-Siberian Geographical Society, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>, 1874. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-143" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-144" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir Henry Maine’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Village Communities</i>, New York, 1876, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 193⁠–⁠196. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-144" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-145" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Nazaroff, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The North Usuri Territory</i> (Russian), <abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, 1887, <abbr>p.</abbr> 65. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-145" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-146" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hanoteau et Letourneux, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">La Kabylie</i>, 3 <abbr>vols.</abbr> Paris, 1883. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-146" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-147" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>To convoke an “aid” or “bee,” some kind of meal must be offered to the community. I am told by a Caucasian friend that in Georgia, when the poor man wants an “aid,” he borrows from the rich man a sheep or two to prepare the meal, and the community bring, in addition to their work, so many provisions that he may repay the debt. A similar habit exists with the Mordovians. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-147" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-148" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hanoteau et Letourneux, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">La Kabylie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, 58. The same respect to strangers is the rule with the Mongols. The Mongol who has refused his roof to a stranger pays the full blood-compensation if the stranger has suffered therefrom (Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Der Mensch in der Geschichte</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, 231). <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-148" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-149" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Khoudadoff, “Notes on the Khevsoures,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="ru-Latn">Zapiski</i> of the Caucasian <abbr>Geogr.</abbr> Society, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>, 1, Tiflis, 1890, <abbr>p.</abbr> 68. They also took the oath of not marrying girls from their own union, thus displaying a remarkable return to the old gentile rules. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-149" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-150" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">Dm.</abbr> Bakradze, “Notes on the Zakataly District,” in same <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="ru-Latn">Zapiski</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>, 1, <abbr>p.</abbr> 264. The “joint team” is as common among the Lezghines as it is among the Ossetes. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-150" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-151" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Post, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Afrikanische Jurisprudenz</i>, Oldenburg, 1887. Münzinger, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Über das Recht und Sitten der Bogos</i>, Winterthur, 1859; Casalis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Les Bassoutos</i>, Paris, 1859; Maclean, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Kafir Laws and Customs</i>, Mount Coke, 1858, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-151" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-152" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Waitz, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, 423 <abbr>seq.</abbr> <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-152" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-153" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Post’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Studien zur Entwicklungsgeschichte des Familien-Rechts Oldenburg</i>, 1889, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 270 <abbr>seq.</abbr> <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-153" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-154" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Powell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnography</i>, Washington, 1881, quoted in Post’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Studien</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 290; Bastian’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Inselgruppen in Oceanien</i>, 1883, <abbr>p.</abbr> 88. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-154" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-155" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>De Stuers, quoted by Waitz, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>, 141. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-155" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-156" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Arnold, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Wanderungen und Ansiedelungen der deutschen Stämme</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 431, even maintains that one-half of the now arable area in middle Germany must have been reclaimed from the sixth to the ninth century. Nitzsch (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Geschichte des deutschen Volkes</i>, Leipzig, 1883, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>) shares the same opinion. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-156" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-157" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Leo and Botta, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Histoire d’Italie</i>, French edition, 1844, <abbr>t.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 37. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-157" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-158" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The composition for the stealing of a simple knife was 15 solidi and of the iron parts of a mill, 45 solidi (See on this subject Lamprecht’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Wirthschaft und Recht der Franken</i> in Raumer’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Historisches Taschenbuch</i>, 1883, <abbr>p.</abbr> 52.) According to the Riparian law, the sword, the spear, and the iron armour of a warrior attained the value of at least twenty-five cows, or two years of a freeman’s labour. A cuirass alone was valued in the Salic law (Desmichels, quoted by Michelet) at as much as thirty-six bushels of wheat. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-158" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-159" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The chief wealth of the chieftains, for a long time, was in their personal domains peopled partly with prisoner slaves, but chiefly in the above way. On the origin of property see Inama Sternegg’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Die Ausbildung der grossen Grundherrschaften in Deutschland</i>, in Schmoller’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Forschungen</i>, <abbr>Bd.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, 1878; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Dahn’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Urgeschichte der germanischen und romanischen Völker</i>, Berlin, 1881; Maurer’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Dorfverfassung</i>; Guizot’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Essais sur l’histoire de France</i>; Maine’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Village Community</i>; Botta’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Histoire d’Italie</i>; Seebohm, Vinogradov, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. R.</abbr> Green, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-159" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-160" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Sir Henry Maine’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">International Law</i>, London, 1888. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-160" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-161" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ancient Laws of Ireland</i>, Introduction; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Nys, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Études de droit international</i>, <abbr>t.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1896, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 86 <abbr>seq.</abbr> Among the Ossetes the arbiters from three <em>oldest</em> villages enjoy a special reputation (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Kovalevsky’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Modern Custom and Old Law</i>, Moscow, 1886, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, 217, Russian). <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-161" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-162" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is permissible to think that this conception (related to the conception of tanistry) played an important part in the life of the period; but research has not yet been directed that way. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-162" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-163" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It was distinctly stated in the charter of <abbr>St.</abbr> Quentin of the year 1002 that the ransom for houses which had to be demolished for crimes went for the city walls. The same destination was given to the <i xml:lang="de">Ungeld</i> in German cities. At Pskov the cathedral was the bank for the fines, and from this fund money was taken for the walls. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-163" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-164" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sohm, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Fränkische Rechts- und Gerichtsverfassung</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 23; also Nitzsch, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Geschichte des deutschen Volkes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 78. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-164" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-165" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the excellent remarks on this subject in Augustin Thierry’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Lettres sur l’histoire de France</i>. 7th Letter. The barbarian translations of parts of the Bible are extremely instructive on this point. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-165" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-166" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Thirty-six times more than a noble, according to the Anglo-Saxon law. In the code of Rothari the slaying of a king is, however, punished by death; but (apart from Roman influence) this new disposition was introduced (in 646) in the Lombardian law⁠—as remarked by Leo and Botta⁠—to cover the king from blood revenge. The king being at that time the executioner of his own sentences (as the tribe formerly was of its own sentences), he had to be protected by a special disposition, the more so as several Lombardian kings before Rothari had been slain in succession (Leo and Botta, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Histoire d’Italie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 66⁠–⁠90). <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-166" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-167" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Kaufmann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Deutsche Geschichte</i>, <abbr>Bd.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, “Die Germanen der Urzeit,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 133. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-167" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-168" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Dahn, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Urgeschichte der germanischen und romanischen Völker</i>, Berlin, 1881, <abbr>Bd.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, 96. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-168" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-169" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>If I thus follow the views long since advocated by Maurer (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Geschichte der Städteverfassung in Deutschland</i>, Erlangen, 1869), it is because he has fully proved the uninterrupted evolution from the village community to the medieval city, and that his views alone can explain the universality of the communal movement. Savigny and Eichhorn and their followers have certainly proved that the traditions of the Roman <i xml:lang="la">municipia</i> had never totally disappeared. But they took no account of the village community period which the barbarians lived through before they had any cities. The fact is, that whenever mankind made a new start in civilization, in Greece, Rome, or middle Europe, it passed through the same stages⁠—the tribe, the village community, the free city, the state⁠—each one naturally evolving out of the preceding stage. Of course, the experience of each preceding civilization was never lost. Greece (itself influenced by Eastern civilizations) influenced Rome, and Rome influenced our civilization; but each of them begin from the same beginning⁠—the tribe. And just as we cannot say that our states are continuations of the Roman state, so also can we not say that the medieval cities of Europe (including Scandinavia and Russia) were a <em>continuation</em> of the Roman cities. They were a continuation of the barbarian village community, influenced to a certain extent by the traditions of the Roman towns. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-169" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-170" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Kovalevsky, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Modern Customs and Ancient Laws of Russia</i> (Ilchester Lectures, London, 1891, Lecture 4). <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-170" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-171" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A considerable amount of research had to be done before this character of the so-called udyelnyi period was properly established by the works of Byelaeff (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tales from Russian History</i>), Kostomaroff (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Beginnings of Autocracy in Russia</i>), and especially Professor Sergievich (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Vyeche and the Prince</i>). The English reader may find some information about this period in the just-named work of <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Kovalevsky, in Rambaud’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Russia</i>, and, in a short summary, in the article “Russia” of the last edition of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Chambers’s Encyclopaedia</i>. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-171" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-172" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ferrari, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Histoire des révolutions d’Italie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 257; Kallsen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Die deutschen Städte im Mittelalter</i>, <abbr>Bd.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> (Halle, 1891). <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-172" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-173" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the excellent remarks of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. L.</abbr> Gomme as regards the folkmote of London (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Literature of Local Institutions</i>, London, 1886, <abbr>p.</abbr> 76). It must, however, be remarked that in royal cities the folkmote never attained the independence which it assumed elsewhere. It is even certain that Moscow and Paris were chosen by the kings and the Church as the cradles of the future royal authority in the State, because they did not possess the tradition of folkmotes accustomed to act as sovereign in all matters. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-173" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-174" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Luchaire, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les Communes françaises</i>; also Kluckohn, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Geschichte des Gottesfrieden</i>, 1857. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Sémichon (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">La paix et la trève de Dieu</i>, 2 <abbr>vols.</abbr>, Paris, 1869) has tried to represent the communal movement as issued from that institution. In reality, the <i xml:lang="la">treuga Dei</i>, like the league started under Louis le Gros for the defence against both the robberies of the nobles and the Norman invasions, was a thoroughly <em>popular</em> movement. The only historian who mentions this last league⁠—that is, Vitalis⁠—describes it as a “popular community” (“<i xml:lang="fr">Considérations sur l’histoire de France</i>,” in <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> of <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Aug.</abbr> Thierry’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Œuvres</i>, Paris, 1868, <abbr>p.</abbr> 191 and note). <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-174" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-175" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ferrari, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 152, 263, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-175" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-176" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Perrens, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Histoire de Florence</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 188; Ferrari, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Histoire des révolutions d’Italie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 283. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-176" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-177" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Aug.</abbr> Thierry, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Essai sur l’histoire du Tiers État</i>, Paris, 1875, <abbr>p.</abbr> 414, note. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-177" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-178" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Rocquain, “<i xml:lang="fr">La Renaissance au XIIe siècle</i>,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Études sur l’histoire de France</i>, Paris, 1875, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 55⁠–⁠117. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-178" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-179" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Kostomaroff, “The Rationalists of the Twelfth Century,” in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Monographies and Researches</i> (Russian). <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-179" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-180" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Very interesting facts relative to the universality of guilds will be found in “Two Thousand Years of Guild Life,” by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. M.</abbr> Lambert, Hull, 1891. On the Georgian <i xml:lang="ka">amkari</i>, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Eghiazarov, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="ka">Gorodskiye Tsekhi</i> (“Organization of Transcaucasian Amkari”), in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs</i> of the Caucasian Geographical Society, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>, 2, 1891. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-180" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-181" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. D.</abbr> Wunderer’s “<i xml:lang="de">Reisebericht</i>” in Fichard’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Frankfurter Archiv</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, 245; quoted by Janssen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Geschichte des deutschen Volkes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 355. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-181" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-182" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Leonard Ennen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Der Dom zu Köln, Historische Einleitung</i>, Köln, 1871, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 46, 50. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-182" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-183" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See previous chapter. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-183" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-184" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Kofod Ancher, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="da">Om gamle Danske Gilder og deres Undergang</i>, Copenhagen, 1785. Statutes of a Knu guild. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-184" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-185" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Upon the position of women in guilds, see Miss Toulmin Smith’s introductory remarks to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">English Guilds</i> of her father. One of the Cambridge statutes (<abbr>p.</abbr> 281) of the year 1503 is quite positive in the following sentence: “Thys statute is made by the comyne assent of all the bretherne and sisterne of alhallowe yelde.” <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-185" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-186" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In medieval times, only secret aggression was treated as a murder. Blood-revenge in broad daylight was justice; and slaying in a quarrel was not murder, once the aggressor showed his willingness to repent and to repair the wrong he had done. Deep traces of this distinction still exist in modern criminal law, especially in Russia. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-186" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-187" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Kofod Ancher, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="da">Om gamle Danske Gilder og deres Undergang</i>, Copenhagen, 1785. This old booklet contains much that has been lost sight of by later explorers. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-187" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-188" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>They played an important part in the revolts of the serfs, and were therefore prohibited several times in succession in the second half of the ninth century. Of course, the king’s prohibitions remained a dead letter. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-188" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-189" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The medieval Italian painters were also organized in guilds, which became at a later epoch Academies of art. If the Italian art of those times is impressed with so much individuality that we distinguish, even now, between the different schools of Padua, Bassano, Treviso, Verona, and so on, although all these cities were under the sway of Venice, this was due⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Paul Richter remarks⁠—to the fact that the painters of each city belonged to a separate guild, friendly with the guilds of other towns, but leading a separate existence. The oldest guild-statute known is that of Verona, dating from 1303, but evidently copied from some much older statute. “Fraternal assistance in necessity of whatever kind,” “hospitality towards strangers, when passing through the town, as thus information may be obtained about matters which one may like to learn,” and “obligation of offering comfort in case of debility” are among the obligations of the members (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Nineteenth Century</i>, <abbr>Nov.</abbr> 1890, and <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 1892). <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-189" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-190" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The chief works on the <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">artéls</i> are named in the article “Russia” of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Encyclopaedia Britannica</i>, 9th edition, <abbr>p.</abbr> 84. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-190" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-191" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for instance, the texts of the Cambridge guilds given by Toulmin Smith (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">English Guilds</i>, London, 1870, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 274⁠–⁠276), from which it appears that the “generall and principall day” was the “eleccioun day;” or, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Ch.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Clode’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Early History of the Guild of the Merchant Taylors</i>, London, 1888, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 45; and so on. For the renewal of allegiance, see the Jomsviking saga, mentioned in Pappenheim’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Altdänische Schutzgilden</i>, Breslau, 1885, <abbr>p.</abbr> 67. It appears very probable that when the guilds began to be prosecuted, many of them inscribed in their statutes the meal day only, or their pious duties, and only alluded to the judicial function of the guild in vague words; but this function did not disappear till a very much later time. The question, “Who will be my judge?” has no meaning now, since the State has appropriated for its bureaucracy the organization of justice; but it was of primordial importance in medieval times, the more so as self-jurisdiction meant self-administration. It must also be remarked that the translation of the Saxon and Danish “guild-bretheren,” or “brodre,” by the Latin <i xml:lang="la">convivii</i> must also have contributed to the above confusion. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-191" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-192" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the excellent remarks upon the frith guild by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. R.</abbr> Green and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Green in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Conquest of England</i>, London, 1883, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 229⁠–⁠230. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-192" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-193" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<a href="appendix.xhtml#appendix-10">See Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>.</a>
						<a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-193" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-194" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Recueil des ordonnances des rois de France</i>, <abbr>t.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>, 562; quoted by <abbr>Aug.</abbr> Thierry in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Considérations sur l’histoire de France</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 196, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr>12mo</abbr>. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-194" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-195" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Luchaire, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les Communes françaises</i>, pp, 45⁠–⁠46. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-195" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-196" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Guilbert de Nogent, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">De vita sua</i>, quoted by Luchaire, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les Communes françaises</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 14. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-196" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-197" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lebret, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Histoire de Venise</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 393; also Marin, quoted by Leo and Botta in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Histoire de l’Italie</i>, French edition, 1844, <abbr>t.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 500. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-197" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-198" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Arnold, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Verfassungsgeschichte der deutschen Freistädte</i>, 1854, <abbr>Bd.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, 227 <abbr>seq.</abbr>; Ennen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Geschichte der Stadt Köln</i>, <abbr>Bd.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 228⁠–⁠229; also the documents published by Ennen and Eckert. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-198" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-199" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Conquest of England</i>, 1883, <abbr>p.</abbr> 453. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-199" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-200" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Byelaeff, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Russian History</i>, <abbr>vols.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-200" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-201" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Gramich, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Verfassungs- und Verwaltungsgeschichte der Stadt Würzburg im 13. bis zum 15. Jahrhundert</i>, Würzburg, 1882, <abbr>p.</abbr> 34. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-201" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-202" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>When a boat brought a cargo of coal to Würzburg, coal could only be sold in retail during the first eight days, each family being entitled to no more than fifty basketfuls. The remaining cargo could be sold wholesale, but the retailer was allowed to raise a <i xml:lang="de">zittlicher</i> profit only, the <i xml:lang="de">unzittlicher</i>, or dishonest profit, being strictly forbidden (Gramich, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Verfassungs- und Verwaltungsgeschichte der Stadt Würzburg im 13. bis zum 15. Jahrhundert</i>, Würzburg, 1882). Same in London (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Liber albus</i>, quoted by Ochenkowski, <abbr>p.</abbr> 161), and, in fact, everywhere. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-202" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-203" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Fagniez, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Études sur l’industrie et la classe industrielle à Paris au XIIIme et XIVme siècle</i>, Paris, 1877, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 155 <abbr>seq.</abbr> It hardly need be added that the tax on bread, and on beer as well, was settled after careful experiments as to the quantity of bread and beer which could be obtained from a given amount of corn. The Amiens archives contain the minutes of such experiences (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> de Calonne, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Vie Municipale</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 77, 93). Also those of London (Ochenkowski, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">England’s wirthschaftliche Entwickelung, <abbr>etc.</abbr></i>, Jena, 1879, <abbr>p.</abbr> 165). <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-203" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-204" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Ch.</abbr> Gross, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Guild Merchant</i>, Oxford, 1890, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 135. His documents prove that this practice existed in Liverpool (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, 148⁠–⁠150), Waterford in Ireland, Neath in Wales, and Linlithgow and Thurso in Scotland. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gross’s texts also show that the purchases were made for distribution, not only among the merchant burgesses, but “upon all citsains and commynalte” (<abbr>p.</abbr> 136, note), or, as the Thurso ordinance of the seventeenth century runs, to “make offer to the merchants, craftsmen, <em>and inhabitants</em> of the said burgh, that they may have their proportion of the same, according to their necessitys and ability.” <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-204" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-205" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Early History of the Guild of Merchant Taylors</i>, by Charles <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Clode, London, 1888, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 361, appendix 10; also the following appendix which shows that the same purchases were made in 1546. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-205" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-206" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cibrario, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les conditions economiques de l’Italie au temps de Dante</i>, Paris, 1865, <abbr>p.</abbr> 44. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-206" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-207" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> de Calonne, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">La vie municipale au XVme siècle dans le Nord de la France</i>, Paris, 1880, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 12⁠–⁠16. In 1485 the city permitted the export to Antwerp of a certain quantity of corn, “the inhabitants of Antwerp being always ready to be agreeable to the merchants and burgesses of Amiens” (ibid., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 75⁠–⁠77 and texts). <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-207" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-208" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Babeau, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">La ville sous l’ancien régime</i>, Paris, 1880. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-208" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-209" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ennen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Geschichte der Stadt Köln</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 491, 492, also texts. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-209" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-210" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The literature of the subject is immense; but there is no work yet which treats of the medieval city as of a whole. For the French Communes, Augustin Thierry’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Lettres and Considérations sur l’histoire de France</i> still remain classical, and Luchaire’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Communes françaises</i> is an excellent addition on the same lines. For the cities of Italy, the great work of Sismondi (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Histoire des républiques italiennes du moyen âge</i>, Paris, 1826, 16 <abbr>vols.</abbr>), Leo and Botta’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Italy</i>, Ferrari’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Revolutions d’Italie</i>, and Hegel’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Geschichte der Städteverfassung in Italien</i>, are the chief sources of general information. For Germany we have Maurer’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Städteverfassung</i>, Barthold’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Geschichte der deutschen Städte</i>, and, of recent works, Hegel’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Städte und Gilden der germanischen Völker</i> (2 <abbr>vols.</abbr> Leipzig, 1891), and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Otto Kallsen’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Die deutschen Städte im Mittelalter</i> (2 <abbr>vols.</abbr> Halle, 1891), as also Janssen’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Geschichte des deutschen Volkes</i> (5 <abbr>vols.</abbr> 1886), which, let us hope, will soon be translated into English (French translation in 1892). For Belgium, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Wauters, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les Libertés communales</i> (Bruxelles, 1869⁠–⁠78, 3 <abbr>vols.</abbr>). For Russia, Byelaeff’s, Kostomaroff’s and Sergievich’s works. And finally, for England, we posses one of the best works on cities of a wider region in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. R.</abbr> Green’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Town Life in the Fifteenth Century</i> (2 <abbr>vols.</abbr> London, 1894). We have, moreover, a wealth of well-known local histories, and several excellent works of general or economical history which I have so often mentioned in this and the preceding chapter. The richness of literature consists, however, chiefly in separate, sometimes admirable, researches into the history of separate cities, especially Italian and German; the guilds; the land question; the economical principles of the time; the economical importance of guilds and crafts; the leagues between cities (the Hansa); and communal art. An incredible wealth of information is contained in works of this second category, of which only some of the more important are named in these pages. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-210" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-211" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Kulischer, in an excellent essay on primitive trade (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Zeitschrift für Völkerpsychologie</i>, <abbr>Bd.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>, 380), also points out that, according to Herodotus, the Argippaeans were considered inviolable, because the trade between the Scythians and the northern tribes took place on their territory. A fugitive was sacred on their territory, and they were often asked to act as arbiters for their neighbours. <a href="appendix.xhtml#appendix-11">See Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>.</a> <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-211" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-212" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some discussion has lately taken place upon the <i xml:lang="de">Weichbild</i> and the <i xml:lang="de">Weichbild</i>-law, which still remain obscure (see Zopfl, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Alterthümer des deutschen Reichs und Rechts</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, 29; Kallsen, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 316). The above explanation seems to be the more probable, but, of course, it must be tested by further research. It is also evident that, to use a Scotch expression, the “mercet cross” could be considered as an emblem of Church jurisdiction, but we find it both in bishop cities and in those in which the folkmote was sovereign. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-212" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-213" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For all concerning the merchant guild see <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gross’s exhaustive work, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Guild Merchant</i> (Oxford, 1890, 2 <abbr>vols.</abbr>); also <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Green’s remarks in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Town Life in the Fifteenth Century</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> <abbr>chaps.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Doren’s review of the subject in Schmoller’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Forschungen</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. If the considerations indicated in the previous chapter (according to which trade was communal at its beginnings) prove to be correct, it will be permissible to suggest as a probable hypothesis that the guild merchant was a body entrusted with commerce in the interest of the whole city, and only gradually became a guild of merchants trading for themselves; while the merchant adventurers of this country, the Novgorod <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">povolniki</i> (free colonizers and merchants) and the <i xml:lang="it">mercati personati</i>, would be those to whom it was left to open new markets and new branches of commerce for themselves. Altogether, it must be remarked that the origin of the medieval city can be ascribed to no separate agency. It was a result of <em>many</em> agencies in different degrees. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-213" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-214" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Janssen’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Geschichte des deutschen Volkes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 315; Gramich’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Würzburg</i>; and, in fact, any collection of ordinances. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-214" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-215" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Falke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Geschichtliche Statistik</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 373⁠–⁠393, and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, 66; quoted in Janssen’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Geschichte</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 339; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. D.</abbr> Blavignac, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Comptes et dépenses de la construction du clocher de Saint-Nicolas à Fribourg en Suisse</i>, comes to a similar conclusion. For Amiens, De Calonne’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Vie Municipale</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 99 and Appendix. For a thorough appreciation and graphical representation of the medieval wages in England and their value in bread and meat, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Steffen’s excellent article and curves in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Nineteenth Century</i> for 1891, and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="sv">Studier öfver lönsystemets historia i England</i>, Stockholm, 1895. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-215" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-216" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>To quote but one example out of many which may be found in Schönberg’s and Falke’s works, the sixteen shoemaker workers (<i xml:lang="de">Schusterknechte</i>) of the town Xanten, on the Rhine, gave, for erecting a screen and an altar in the church, 75 guldens of subscriptions, and 12 guldens out of their box, which money was worth, according to the best valuations, ten times its present value. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-216" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-217" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Quoted by Janssen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Geschichte</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 343. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-217" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-218" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Economical Interpretation of History</i>, London, 1891, <abbr>p.</abbr> 303. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-218" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-219" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Janssen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Geschichte</i>. See also <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Alwin Schultz, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Deutsches Leben im <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> und <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span> Jahrhundert</i>, grosse Ausgabe, Wien, 1892, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 67 <abbr>seq.</abbr> At Paris, the day of labour varied from seven to eight hours in the winter to fourteen hours in summer in certain trades, while in others it was from eight to nine hours in winter, to from ten to twelve in Summer. All work was stopped on Saturdays and on about twenty-five other days (<i xml:lang="fr">jours de commun de vile foire</i>) at four o’clock, while on Sundays and thirty other holidays there was no work at all. The general conclusion is, that the medieval worker worked <em>less</em> hours, all taken, than the present-day worker (<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Martin Saint-Léon, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Histoire des corporations</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 121). <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-219" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-220" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Stieda, “<i xml:lang="de">Hansische Vereinbarungen über städtisches Gewerbe im <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> und <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span> Jahrhundert</i>,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Hansische Geschichtsblätter</i>, Jahrgang 1886, <abbr>p.</abbr> 121. Schönberg’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Wirthschaftliche Bedeutung der Zunfte</i>; also, partly, Roscher. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-220" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-221" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Toulmin Smith’s deeply-felt remarks about the royal spoliation of the guilds, in Miss Smith’s Introduction to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">English Guilds</i>. In France the same royal spoliation and abolition of the guilds’ jurisdiction was begun from 1306, and the final blow was struck in 1382 (Fagniez, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Études sur l’industrie et la classe industrielle à Paris au XIIIme et XIVme siècle</i>, Paris, 1877, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 52⁠–⁠54). <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-221" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-222" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Adam Smith and his contemporaries knew well what they were condemning when they wrote against the <em>State</em> interference in trade and the trade monopolies of <em>State</em> creation. Unhappily, their followers, with their hopeless superficiality, flung medieval guilds and State interference into the same sack, making no distinction between a Versailles edict and a guild ordinance. It hardly need be said that the economists who have seriously studied the subject, like Schönberg (the editor of the well-known course of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Political Economy</i>), never fell into such an error. But, till lately, diffuse discussions of the above type went on for economical “science.” <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-222" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-223" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Florence the seven minor arts made their revolution in 1270⁠–⁠82, and its results are fully described by Perrens (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Histoire de Florence</i>, Paris, 1877, 3 <abbr>vols.</abbr>), and especially by Gino Capponi (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="it">Storia della repubblica di Firenze</i>, <i xml:lang="it">2nda edizione</i>, 1876, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 58⁠–⁠80; translated into German). In Lyons, on the contrary, where the movement of the minor crafts took place in 1402, the latter were defeated and lost the right of themselves nominating their own judges. The two parties came apparently to a compromise. In Rostock the same movement took place in 1313; in Zürich in 1336; in Bern in 1363; in Braunschweig in 1374, and next year in Hamburg; in Lübeck in 1376⁠–⁠84; and so on. See Schmoller’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Strasbourg zur Zeit der Zunftkämpfe</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Strasbourg’s Bluthe</i>; Brentano’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Arbeitergilden der Gegenwart</i>, 2 <abbr>vols.</abbr>, Leipzig, 1871⁠–⁠72; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Eb.</abbr> Bain’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Merchant and Craft Guilds</i>, Aberdeen, 1887, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 26⁠–⁠47, 75, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> As to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gross’s opinion relative to the same struggles in England, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Green’s remarks in her <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Town Life in the Fifteenth Century</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, 190⁠–⁠217; also the chapter on the Labour Question, and, in fact, the whole of this extremely interesting volume. Brentano’s views on the crafts’ struggles, expressed especially in §§ <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> of his essay “On the History and Development of Guilds,” in Toulmin Smith’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">English Guilds</i> remain classical for the subject, and may be said to have been again and again confirmed by subsequent research. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-223" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-224" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>To give but one example⁠—Cambrai made its first revolution in 907, and, after three or four more revolts, it obtained its charter in 1076. This charter was repealed twice (1107 and 1138), and twice obtained again (in 1127 and 1180). Total, 223 years of struggles before conquering the right to independence. Lyons⁠—from 1195 to 1320. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-224" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-225" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Tuetey, “<i xml:lang="fr">Étude sur Le droit municipal⁠ ⁠… en Franche-Comte</i>,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Mémoires de la Société d’émulation de Montbéliard</i>, <i xml:lang="it">2e série</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, 129 <abbr>seq.</abbr> <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-225" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-226" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This seems to have been often the case in Italy. In Switzerland, Bern bought even the towns of Thun and Burgdorf. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-226" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-227" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Such was, at least, the case in the cities of Tuscany (Florence, Lucca, Sienna, Bologna, <abbr>etc.</abbr>), for which the relations between city and peasants are best known. (Luchitzkiy, “Slavery and Russian Slaves in Florence,” in Kiev University <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="ru-Latn">Izvestia</i> for 1885, who has perused Rumohr’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Ursprung der Besitzlosigkeit der Colonien in Toscana</i>, 1830.) The whole matter concerning the relations between the cities and the peasants requires much more study than has hitherto been done. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-227" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-228" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ferrari’s generalizations are often too theoretical to be always correct; but his views upon the part played by the nobles in the city wars are based upon a wide range of authenticated facts. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-228" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-229" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Only such cities as stubbornly kept to the cause of the barons, like Pisa or Verona, lost through the wars. For many towns which fought on the barons’ side, the defeat was also the beginning of liberation and progress. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-229" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-230" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ferrari, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, 18, 104 <abbr>seq.</abbr>; Leo and Botta, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 432. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-230" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-231" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Joh.</abbr> Falke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Die Hansa Als Deutsche See- und Handelsmacht</i>, Berlin, 1863, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 31, 55. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-231" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-232" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For Aachen and Cologne we have direct testimony that the bishops of these two cities⁠—one of them bought by the enemy⁠—opened to him the gates. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-232" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-233" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the facts, though not always the conclusions, of Nitzsch, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, 133 <abbr>seq.</abbr>; also Kallsen, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 458, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-233" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-234" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On the Commune of the Laonnais, which, until Melleville’s researches (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Histoire de la Commune du Laonnais</i>, Paris, 1853), was confounded with the Commune of Laon, see Luchaire, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 75 <abbr>seq.</abbr> For the early peasants’ guilds and subsequent unions see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Wilman’s “<i xml:lang="de">Die ländlichen Schutzgilden Westphaliens</i>,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Zeitschrift für Kulturgeschichte</i>, <i xml:lang="de">neue Folge</i>, <abbr>Bd.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, quoted in Henne-am-Rhyn’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Kulturgeschichte</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, 249. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-234" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-235" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Luchaire, <abbr>p.</abbr> 149. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-235" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-236" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Two important cities, like Mainz and Worms, would settle a political contest by means of arbitration. After a civil war broken out in Abbeville, Amiens would act, in 1231, as arbiter (Luchaire, 149); and so on. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-236" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-237" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for instance, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Stieda, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Hansische Vereinbarungen</i>, <abbr>l.c.</abbr>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 114. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-237" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-238" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cosmo Innes’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Early Scottish History</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Scotland in Middle Ages</i>, quoted by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> Denton, <abbr>l.c.</abbr>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 68, 69; Lamprecht’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Deutsches wirthschaftliche Leben im Mittelalter</i>, review by Schmoller in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Jahrbuch</i>, <abbr>Bd.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>; Sismondi’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Tableau de l’agriculture toscane</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 226 <abbr>seq.</abbr> The dominions of Florence could be recognized at a glance through their prosperity. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-238" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-239" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> John <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Ennett (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Six Essays</i>, London, 1891) has excellent pages on this aspect of medieval architecture. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Willis, in his appendix to Whewell’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Inductive Sciences</i> (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 261⁠–⁠262), has pointed out the beauty of the mechanical relations in medieval buildings. “A new decorative construction was matured,” he writes, “not thwarting and controlling, but assisting and harmonizing with the mechanical construction. Every member, every moulding, becomes a sustainer of weight; and by the multiplicity of props assisting each other, and the consequent subdivision of weight, the eye was satisfied of the stability of the structure, notwithstanding curiously slender aspects of the separate parts.” An art which sprang out of the <em>social</em> life of the city could not be better characterized. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-239" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-240" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Ennen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Der Dom zu Köln, seine Construction und Anstaltung</i>, Köln, 1871. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-240" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-241" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The three statues are among the outer decorations of Notre Dame de Paris. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-241" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-242" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Medieval art, like Greek art, did not know those curiosity shops which we call a National Gallery or a Museum. A picture was painted, a statue was carved, a bronze decoration was cast to stand in its proper place in a monument of communal art. It lived there, it was part of a whole, and it contributed to give unity to the impression produced by the whole. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-242" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-243" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. T.</abbr> Ennett’s “Second Essay,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 36. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-243" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-244" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sismondi, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>, 172; <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>, 356. The great canal, <i xml:lang="it">Naviglio Grande</i>, which brings the water from the Tessino, was begun in 1179, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> after the conquest of independence, and it was ended in the thirteenth century. On the subsequent decay, see <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>, 355. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-244" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-245" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In 1336 it had 8,000 to 10,000 boys and girls in its primary schools, 1,000 to 1,200 boys in its seven middle schools, and from 550 to 600 students in its four universities. The thirty communal hospitals contained over 1,000 beds for a population of 90,000 inhabitants (Capponi, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, 249 <abbr>seq.</abbr>). It has more than once been suggested by authoritative writers that education stood, as a rule, at a much higher level than is generally supposed. Certainly so in democratic Nuremberg. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-245" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-246" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Ranke’s excellent considerations upon the essence of Roman Law in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Weltgeschichte</i>, <abbr>Bd.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. <abbr>Abth.</abbr> 2, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 20⁠–⁠31. Also Sismondi’s remarks upon the part played by the <i xml:lang="fr">légistes</i> in the constitution of royal authority, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Histoire des Français</i>, Paris, 1826, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>, 85⁠–⁠99. The popular hatred against these “<i xml:lang="de">weise Doktoren und Beutelschneider des Volks</i>” broke out with full force in the first years of the sixteenth century in the sermons of the early Reform movement. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-246" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-247" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Brentano fully understood the fatal effects of the struggle between the “old burghers” and the newcomers. Miaskowski, in his work on the village communities of Switzerland, has indicated the same for village communities. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-247" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-248" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The trade in slaves kidnapped in the East was never discontinued in the Italian republics till the fifteenth century. Feeble traces of it are found also in Germany and elsewhere. See Cibrario <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="it">Della schiavitù e del servaggio</i>, 2 <abbr>vols.</abbr> Milan, 1868; Professor Luchitzkiy, “Slavery and Russian Slaves in Florence in the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries,” in Izvestia of the Kiev University, 1885. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-248" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-249" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. R.</abbr> Green’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the English People</i>, London, 1878, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 455. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-249" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-250" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the theories expressed by the Bologna lawyers, already at the Congress of Roncaglia in 1158. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-250" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-251" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A bulky literature, dealing with this formerly much neglected subject, is now growing in Germany. Keller’s works, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Ein Apostel der Wiedertäufer and Geschichte der Wiedertäufer</i>, Cornelius’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Geschichte des munsterischen Aufruhrs</i>, and Janssen’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Geschichte des deutschen Volkes</i> may be named as the leading sources. The first attempt at familiarizing English readers with the results of the wide researches made in Germany in this direction has been made in an excellent little work by Richard Heath⁠—“Anabaptism from its Rise at Zwickau to its Fall at Münster, 1521⁠–⁠1536,” London, 1895 (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Baptist Manuals</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>)⁠—where the leading features of the movement are well indicated, and full bibliographical information is given. Also <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Kautsky’s “Communism in Central Europe in the Time of the Reformation,” London, 1897. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-251" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-252" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Few of our contemporaries realize both the extent of this movement and the means by which it was suppressed. But those who wrote immediately after the great peasant war estimated at from 100,000 to 150,000 men the number of peasants slaughtered after their defeat in Germany. See Zimmermann’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Allgemeine Geschichte des grossen Bauernkrieges</i>. For the measures taken to suppress the movement in the Netherlands see Richard Heath’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Anabaptism</i>. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-252" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-253" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Chacun s’en est accommodé selon sa bienséance⁠ ⁠… on les a partagés⁠ ⁠… pour dépouiller les communes, on s’est servi de dettes simulées</i>” (Edict of Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>, of 1667, quoted by several authors. Eight years before that date the communes had been taken under State management). <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-253" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-254" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“On a great landlord’s estate, even if he has millions of revenue, you are sure to find the land uncultivated” (Arthur Young). “One-fourth part of the soil went out of culture;” “for the last hundred years the land has returned to a savage state;” “the formerly flourishing Sologne is now a big marsh;” and so on (Théron de Montaugé, quoted by Taine in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Origines de la France Contemporaine</i>, tome <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 441). <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-254" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-255" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Babeau, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le Village sous l’Ancien Régime</i>, <i xml:lang="fr">3e édition</i>. Paris, 1892. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-255" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-256" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Eastern France the law only confirmed what the peasants had already done themselves. See my work, The Great French Revolution, <abbr>chaps.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvii</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlviii</span>, London (Heinemann), 1909. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-256" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-257" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>After the triumph of the middle-class reaction the communal lands were declared (August 24, 1794) the States domains, and, together with the lands confiscated from the nobility, were put up for sale, and pilfered by the <i xml:lang="fr">bandes noires</i> of the small bourgeoisie. True that a stop to this pilfering was put next year (law of 2 Prairial, An <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>), and the preceding law was abrogated; but then the village Communities were simply abolished, and cantonal councils were introduced instead. Only seven years later (9 Prairial, An <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>), <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> in 1801, the village communities were reintroduced, but not until after having been deprived of all their rights, the mayor and syndics being nominated by the Government in the 36,000 communes of France! This system was maintained till after the revolution of 1830, when elected communal councils were reintroduced under the law of 1787. As to the communal lands, they were again seized upon by the State in 1813, plundered as such, and only partly restored to the communes in 1816. See the classical collection of French laws, by Dalloz, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Répertoire de Jurisprudence</i>; also the works of Doniol, Dareste, Bonnemere, Babeau, and many others. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-257" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-258" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This procedure is so absurd that one would not believe it possible if the fifty-two different acts were not enumerated in full by a quite authoritative writer in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Journal des Economistes</i> (1893, April, <abbr>p.</abbr> 94), and several similar examples were not given by the same author. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-258" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-259" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Ochenkowski, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Englands wirthschaftliche Entwickelung im Ausgange des Mittelalters</i> (Jena, 1879), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 35 <abbr>seq.</abbr>, where the whole question is discussed with full knowledge of the texts. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-259" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-260" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Nasse, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Über die mittelalterliche Feldgemeinschaft und die Einhegungen des <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>. Jahrhunderts in England</i> (Bonn, 1869), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 4, 5; Vinogradov, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Villainage in England</i> (Oxford, 1892). <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-260" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-261" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Fr.</abbr> Seebohm, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The English Village Community</i>, 3rd <abbr>ed.</abbr>, 1884, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 13⁠–⁠15. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-261" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-262" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“An examination into the details of an Enclosure Act will make clear the point that the system as above described [communal ownership] is the system which it was the object of the Enclosure Act to remove” (Seebohm, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The English Village Community</i>, 3rd <abbr>ed.</abbr>, 1884, <abbr>p.</abbr> 13). And further on, “They were generally drawn in the same form, commencing with the recital that the open and common fields lie dispersed in small pieces, intermixed with each other and inconveniently situated; that diverse persons own parts of them, and are entitled to rights of common on them⁠ ⁠… and that it is desired that they may be divided and enclosed, a specific share being let out and allowed to each owner” (<abbr>p.</abbr> 14). Porter’s list contained 3,867 such Acts, of which the greatest numbers fall upon the decades of 1770⁠–⁠1780 and 1800⁠–⁠1820, as in France. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-262" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-263" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Switzerland we see a number of communes, ruined by wars, which have sold part of their lands, and now endeavour to buy them back. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-263" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-264" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Buchenberger, “<i xml:lang="de">Agrarwesen und Agrarpolitik</i>,” in <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Wagner’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Handbuch der politischen Oekonomie</i>, 1892, Band <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 280 <abbr>seq.</abbr> <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-264" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-265" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. L.</abbr> Gomme, “The Village Community, with special reference to its Origin and Forms of Survival in Great Britain” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Contemporary Science Series</i>), London, 1890, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 141⁠–⁠143; also his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Primitive Folkmoots</i> (London, 1880), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 98 <abbr>seq.</abbr> <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-265" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-266" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“In almost all parts of the country, in the Midland and Eastern counties particularly, but also in the west⁠—in Wiltshire, for example⁠—in the south, as in Surrey, in the north, as in Yorkshire⁠—there are extensive open and common fields. Out of 316 parishes of Northamptonshire 89 are in this condition; more than 100 in Oxfordshire; about 50,000 acres in Warwickshire; in Berkshire half the county; more than half of Wiltshire; in Huntingdonshire out of a total area of 240,000 acres 130,000 were commonable meadows, commons, and fields” (Marshall, quoted in Sir Henry Maine’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Village Communities in the East and West</i>, New York edition, 1876, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 88, 89). See also <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Slater’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The English Peasantry and the Enclosure of Common Fields</i>, London, 1907. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-266" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-267" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ibid. <abbr>p.</abbr> 88; also Fifth Lecture. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-267" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-268" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In quite a number of books dealing with English country life which I have consulted I have found charming descriptions of country scenery and the like, but almost nothing about the daily life and customs of the labourers. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-268" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-269" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Switzerland the peasants in the open land also fell under the dominion of lords, and large parts of their estates were appropriated by the lords in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Miaskowski, in Schmoller’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Forschungen</i>, <abbr>Bd.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, 1879, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 12 <abbr>seq.</abbr>) But the peasant war in Switzerland did not end in such a crushing defeat of the peasants as it did in other countries, and a great deal of the communal rights and lands was retained. The self-government of the communes is, in fact, the very foundation of the Swiss liberties. (<abbr>cf.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Burtli, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Der Ursprung der Eidgenossenschaft aus der Markgenossenschaft</i>, Zürich, 1891.) <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-269" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-270" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miakowski in Schmoller’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Forschungen</i>, <abbr>Bd.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, 1879, <abbr>p.</abbr> 15. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-270" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-271" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See on this subject a series of works, summed up in one of the excellent and suggestive chapters (not yet translated into English) which <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Bücher has added to the German translation of Laveleye’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Primitive Ownership</i>. Also Meitzen, “<i xml:lang="de">Das Agrar- und Forst-Wesen, die Allmenden und die Landgemeinden der Deutschen Schweiz</i>,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Jahrbuch für Staatswissenschaft</i>, 1880, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>, (analysis of Miaskowsky’s works); O’Brien, “Notes in a Swiss village,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Macmillan’s Magazine</i>, October 1885. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-271" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-272" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The wedding gifts, which often substantially contribute in this country to the comfort of the young households, are evidently a remainder of the communal habits. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-272" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-273" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The communes own, 4,554,100 acres of woods out of 24,813,000 in the whole territory, and 6,936,300 acres of natural meadows out of 11,394,000 acres in France. The remaining 2,000,000 acres are fields, orchards, and so on. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-273" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-274" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Caucasia they even do better among the Georgians. As the meal costs, and a poor man cannot afford to give it, a sheep is bought by those same neighbours who come to aid in the work. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-274" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-275" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Alfred Baudrillart, in <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Baudrillart’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les Populations Rurales de la France</i>, 3rd series (Paris, 1893), <abbr>p.</abbr> 479. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-275" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-276" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal" xml:lang="fr">Journal des Économistes</i> (August 1892, May and August 1893) has lately given some of the results of analyses made at the agricultural laboratories at Ghent and at Paris. The extent of falsification is simply incredible; so also the devices of the “honest traders.” In certain seeds of grass there was 32 percent of gains of sand, coloured so as to deceive even an experienced eye; other samples contained from 52 to 22 percent only of pure seed, the remainder being weeds. Seeds of vetch contained 11 percent of a poisonous grass (<i xml:lang="fr">nielle</i>); a flour for cattle-fattening contained 36 percent of sulphates; and so on <i xml:lang="la">ad infinitum</i>. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-276" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-277" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Baudrillart, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les Populations Rurales de la France</i>, 3rd series (Paris, 1893), <abbr>p.</abbr> 309. Originally one grower would undertake to supply water, and several others would agee to make use of it. “What especially characterises such associations,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Baudrillart remarks, “is that no sort of written agreement is concluded. All is arranged in words. There was, however, not one single case of difficulties having arisen between the parties.” <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-277" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-278" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Baudrillart, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les Populations Rurales de la France</i>, 3rd series (Paris, 1893), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 300, 341, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Terssac, president of the <abbr>St.</abbr> Gironnais syndicate (Ariège), wrote to my friend in substance as follows:⁠—“For the exhibition of Toulouse our association has grouped the owners of cattle which seemed to us worth exhibiting. The society undertook to pay one-half of the travelling and exhibition expenses; one-fourth was paid by each owner, and the remaining fourth by those exhibitors who had got prizes. The result was that many took part in the exhibition who never would have done it otherwise. Those who got the highest awards (350 francs) have contributed 10 percent of their prizes, while those who have got no prize have only spent 6 to 7 francs each.” <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-278" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-279" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Württemberg 1,629 communes out of 1,910 have communal property. They owned in 1863 over 1,000,000 acres of land. In Baden 1,256 communes out of 1,582 have communal land; in 1884⁠–⁠1888 they held 121,500 acres of fields in communal culture, and 675,000 acres of forests, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> 46 percent of the total area under woods. In Saxony 39 percent of the total area is in communal ownership (Schmoller’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Jahrbuch</i>, 1886, <abbr>p.</abbr> 359). In Hohenzollern nearly two-thirds of all meadow land, and in Hohenzollern-Hechingen 41 percent of all landed property, are owned by the village communities (Buchenberger, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Agrarwesen</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 300). <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-279" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-280" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Bücher, who, in a special chapter added to Laveleye’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Ureigenthum</i>, has collected all information relative to the village community in Germany. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-280" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-281" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Bücher, ibid. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 89, 90. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-281" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-282" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For this legislation and the numerous obstacles which were put in the way, in the shape of red-tapeism and supervision, see Buchenberger’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Agrarwesen und Agrarpolitik</i>, <abbr>Bd.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 342⁠–⁠363, and <abbr>p.</abbr> 506, note. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-282" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-283" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Buchenberger, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Agrarwesen und Agrarpolitik</i>, <abbr>Bd.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 510. The General Union of Agricultural Cooperation comprises an aggregate of 1,679 societies. In Silesia an aggregate of 32,000 acres of land has been lately drained by 73 associations; 454,800 acres in Prussia by 516 associations; in Bavaria there are 1,715 drainage and irrigation unions. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-283" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-284" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<a href="appendix.xhtml#appendix-12">See Appendix <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>.</a>
						<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-284" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-285" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For the Balkan peninsula see Laveleye’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Propriété Primitive</i>. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-285" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-286" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The facts concerning the village community, contained in nearly a hundred volumes (out of 450) of these inquests, have been classified and summed up in an excellent Russian work by “<abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">V. V.</abbr>” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Peasant Community</i> (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="ru-Latn">Krestianskaya Obschina</i>), <abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, 1892, which, apart from its theoretical value, is a rich compendium of data relative to this subject. The above inquests have also given origin to an immense literature, in which the modern village-community question for the first time emerges from the domain of generalities and is put on the solid basis of reliable and sufficiently detailed facts. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-286" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-287" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The redemption had to be paid by annuities for forty-nine years. As years went, and the greatest part of it was paid, it became easier and easier to redeem the smaller remaining part of it, and, as each allotment could be redeemed individually, advantage was taken of this disposition by traders, who bought land for half its value from the ruined peasants. A law was consequently passed to put a stop to such sales. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-287" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-288" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">V. V.</abbr>, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Peasant Community</i>, has grouped together all facts relative to this movement. About the rapid agricultural development of South Russia and the spread of machinery English readers will find information in the Consular Reports (Odessa, Taganrog). <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-288" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-289" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In some instances they proceeded with great caution. In one village they began by putting together all meadow land, but only a small portion of the fields (about five acres per soul) was rendered communal; the remainder continued to be owned individually. Later on, in 1862⁠–⁠1864, the system was extended, but only in 1884 was communal possession introduced in full.⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">V. V.</abbr>’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Peasant Community</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 1⁠–⁠14. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-289" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-290" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On the Mennonite village community see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Klaus, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Our Colonies</i> (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="ru-Latn">Nashi Kolonii</i>), <abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, 1869. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-290" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-291" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Such communal cultures are known to exist in 159 villages out of 195 in the Ostrogozhsk district; in 150 out of 187 in Slavyanoserbsk; in 107 village communities in Alexandrovsk, 93 in Nikolayevsk, 35 in Elisabethgrad. In a German colony the communal culture is made for repaying a communal debt. All join in the work, although the debt was contracted by 94 householders out of 155. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-291" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-292" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lists of such works which came under the notice of the <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">zemstvo</i> statisticians will be found in <abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">V. V.</abbr>’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Peasant Community</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 459⁠–⁠600. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-292" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-293" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the government of Moscow the experiment was usually made on the field which was reserved for the above-mentioned communal culture. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-293" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-294" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Several instances of such and similar improvements were given in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Official Messenger</i>, 1894, <abbr>Nos.</abbr> 256⁠–⁠258. Associations between “horseless” peasants begin to appear also in South Russia. Another extremely interesting fact is the sudden development in Southern West Siberia of very numerous cooperative creameries for making butter. Hundreds of them spread in Tobolsk and Tomsk, without anyone knowing wherefrom the initiative of the movement came. It came from the Danish cooperators, who used to export their own butter of higher quality, and to buy butter of a lower quality for their own use in Siberia. After a several years’ intercourse, they introduced creameries there. Now, a great export trade, carried on by a Union of the Creameries, has grown out of their endeavours and more than a thousand cooperative shops have been opened in the villages. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-294" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-295" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Toulmin Smith, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">English Guilds</i>, London, 1870, <abbr>Introd.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xliii</span>. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-295" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-296" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Act of Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>⁠—the first of his reign⁠—ordered to hand over to the Crown “all fraternities, brotherhoods, and guilds being within the realm of England and Wales and other of the king’s dominions; and all manors, lands, tenements, and other hereditaments belonging to them or any of them” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">English Guilds</i>, <abbr>Introd.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xliii</span>). See also Ockenkowski’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Englands wirtschaftliche Entwickelung im Ausgange des Mittelalters</i>, Jena, 1879, <abbr>chaps.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>-<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-296" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-297" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Sidney and Beatrice Webb, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Trade-Unionism</i>, London, 1894, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 21⁠–⁠38. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-297" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-298" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See in Sidney Webb’s work the associations which existed at that time. The London artisans are supposed to have never been better organized than in 1810⁠–⁠20. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-298" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-299" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The National Association for the Protection of Labour included about 150 separate unions, which paid high levies, and had a membership of about 100,000. The Builders’ Union and the Miners’ Unions also were big organizations (Webb, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Trade-Unionism</i>, London, 1894, <abbr>p.</abbr> 107). <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-299" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-300" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I follow in this <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Webb’s work, which is replete with documents to confirm his statements. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-300" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-301" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Great changes have taken place since the forties in the attitude of the richer classes towards the unions. However, even in the sixties, the employers made a formidable concerted attempt to crush them by locking out whole populations. Up to 1869 the simple agreement to strike, and the announcement of a strike by placards, to say nothing of picketing, were often punished as intimidation. Only in 1875 the Master and Servant Act was repealed, peaceful picketing was permitted, and “violence and intimidation” during strikes fell into the domain of common law. Yet, even during the dock-labourers’ strike in 1887, relief money had to be spent for fighting before the Courts for the right of picketing, while the prosecutions of the last few years menace once more to render the conquered rights illusory. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-301" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-302" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A weekly contribution of 6<abbr>d.</abbr> out of an 18<abbr>s.</abbr> wage, or of 1<abbr>s.</abbr> out of 25<abbr>s.</abbr>, means much more than £9 out of a £300 income: it is mostly taken upon food; and the levy is soon doubled when a strike is declared in a brother union. The graphic description of trade-union life, by a skilled craftsman, published by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Webb (<abbr>pp.</abbr> 431 <abbr>seq.</abbr>), gives an excellent idea of the amount of work required from a unionist. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-302" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-303" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the debates upon the strikes of Falkenau in Austria before the Austrian Reichstag on the 10th of May, 1894, in which debates the fact is fully recognized by the Ministry and the owner of the colliery. Also the English Press of that time. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-303" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-304" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Many such facts will be found in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Daily Chronicle</i> and partly the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Daily News</i> for October and November 1894. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-304" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-305" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The 31,473 productive and consumers’ associations on the Middle Rhine showed, about 1890, a yearly expenditure of £18,437,500; £3,675,000 were granted during the year in loans. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-305" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-306" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>British Consular Report, April 1889. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-306" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-307" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A capital research on this subject has been published in Russian in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="ru-Latn">Zapiski</i> (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs</i>) of the Caucasian Geographical Society, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>, 2, Tiflis, 1891, by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Egiazaroff. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-307" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-308" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Escape from a French prison is extremely difficult; nevertheless a prisoner escaped from one of the French prisons in 1884 or 1885. He even managed to conceal himself during the whole day, although the alarm was given and the peasants in the neighbourhood were on the lookout for him. Next morning found him concealed in a ditch, close by a small village. Perhaps he intended to steal some food, or some clothes in order to take off his prison uniform. As he was lying in the ditch a fire broke out in the village. He saw a woman running out of one of the burning houses, and heard her desperate appeals to rescue a child in the upper storey of the burning house. No one moved to do so. Then the escaped prisoner dashed out of his retreat, made his way through the fire, and, with a scalded face and burning clothes, brought the child safe out of the fire, and handed it to its mother. Of course he was arrested on the spot by the village gendarme, who now made his appearance. He was taken back to the prison. The fact was reported in all French papers, but none of them bestirred itself to obtain his release. If he had shielded a warder from a comrade’s blow, he would have been made a hero of. But his act was simply humane, it did not promote the State’s ideal; he himself did not attribute it to a sudden inspiration of divine grace; and that was enough to let the man fall into oblivion. Perhaps, six or twelve months were added to his sentence for having stolen⁠—“the State’s property”⁠—the prison’s dress. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-308" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-309" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The medical Academy for Women (which has given to Russia a large portion of her 700 graduated lady doctors), the four Ladies’ Universities (about 1,000 pupils in 1887; closed that year, and reopened in 1895), and the High Commercial School for Women are <em>entirely</em> the work of such private societies. To the same societies we owe the high standard which the girls’ gymnasia attained since they were opened in the sixties. The 100 gymnasia now scattered over the Empire (over 70,000 pupils), correspond to the High Schools for Girls in this country; all teachers are, however, graduates of the universities. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-309" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-310" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Verein für Verbreitung gemeinnütslicher Kenntnisse</i>, although it has only 5,500 members, has already opened more than 1,000 public and school libraries, organized thousands of lectures, and published most valuable books. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-310" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-311" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Very few writers in sociology have paid attention to it. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Ihering is one of them, and his case is very instructive. When the great German writer on law began his philosophical work, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Der Zweck im Rechte</i> (“Purpose in Law”), he intended to analyze “the active forces which call forth the advance of society and maintain it,” and to thus give “the theory of the sociable man.” He analyzed, first, the egotistic forces at work, including the present wage-system and coercion in its variety of political and social laws; and in a carefully worked-out scheme of his work he intended to give the last paragraph to the ethical forces⁠—the sense of duty and mutual love⁠—which contribute to the same aim. When he came, however, to discuss the social functions of these two factors, he had to write a second volume, twice as big as the first; and yet he treated only of the personal factors which will take in the following pages only a few lines. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Dargun took up the same idea in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Egoismus und Altruismus in der Nationalokonomie</i>, Leipzig, 1885, adding some new facts. Büchner’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Love</i>, and the several paraphrases of it published here and in Germany, deal with the same subject. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-311" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-312" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Light and Shadows in the Life of an Artisan</i>. Coventry, 1893. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-312" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-313" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Many rich people cannot understand how the very poor can help each other, because they do not realize upon what infinitesimal amounts of food or money often hangs the life of one of the poorest classes. Lord Shaftesbury had understood this terrible truth when he started his Flowers and Watercress Girls’ Fund, out of which loans of one pound, and only occasionally two pounds, were granted, to enable the girls to buy a basket and flowers when the winter sets in and they are in dire distress. The loans were given to girls who had “not a sixpence,” but never failed to find some other poor to go bail for them. “Of all the movements I have ever been connected with,” Lord Shaftesbury wrote, “I look upon this Watercress Girls’ movement as the most successful.⁠ ⁠… It was begun in 1872, and we have had out 800 to 1,000 loans, and have not lost £50 during the whole period.⁠ ⁠… What has been lost⁠—and it has been very little, under the circumstances⁠—has been by reason of death or sickness, not by fraud” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Life and Work of the Seventh Earl of Shaftesbury</i>, by Edwin Hodder, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 322. London, 1885⁠–⁠86). Several more facts in point in <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Ch.</abbr> Booth’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life and Labour in London</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>; in Miss Beatrice Potter’s “Pages from a Work Girl’s Diary” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Nineteenth Century</i>, September 1888, <abbr>p.</abbr> 310); and so on. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-313" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-314" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Samuel Plimsoll, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Our Seamen</i>, cheap edition, London, 1870, <abbr>p.</abbr> 110. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-314" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-315" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Our Seamen</i>, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">u.s.</abbr>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 110. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Plimsoll added: “I don’t wish to disparage the rich, but I think it may be reasonably doubted whether these qualities are so fully developed in them; for, notwithstanding that not a few of them are not unacquainted with the claims, reasonable or unreasonable, of poor relatives, these qualities are not in such constant exercise. Riches seem in so many cases to smother the manliness of their possessors, and their sympathies become, not so much narrowed as⁠—so to speak⁠—stratified: they are reserved for the sufferings of their own class, and also the woes of those above them. They seldom tend downwards much, and they are far more likely to admire an act of courage⁠ ⁠… than to admire the constantly exercised fortitude and the tenderness which are the daily characteristics of a British workman’s life”⁠—and of the workmen all over the world as well. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-315" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-316" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of the Seventh Earl of Shaftesbury</i>, by Edwin Hodder, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 137⁠–⁠138. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-316" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-317" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Marriage Customs in Many Lands</i>, by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. N.</abbr> Hutchinson, London, 1897. <a href="appendix.xhtml#noteref-317" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-318" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Many new and interesting forms of these have been collected by Wilhelm Rudeck, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Geschichte der öffentlichen Sittlichkeit in Deutschland</i>, analyzed by Durckheim in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Annuaire Sociologique</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, 312. <a href="appendix.xhtml#noteref-318" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-319" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i xml:lang="la">A Servio Tullio populus romanus relatus in censum, digestus in classes, curiis atque collegiis distributus</i> (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Martin-Saint Léon, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Histoire des corporations de métiers depuis leurs origines jusqu’à leur suppression en</i> 1791, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, Paris, 1897). <a href="appendix.xhtml#noteref-319" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-320" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Roman <i xml:lang="la">sodalitia</i>, so far as we may judge (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Martin-Saint Léon, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Histoire des corporations de métiers depuis leurs origines jusqu’à leur suppression en</i> 1791, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, Paris, 1897, <abbr>p.</abbr> 9), corresponded to the Kabyle <i xml:lang="kab">çofs</i>. <a href="appendix.xhtml#noteref-320" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-321" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is striking to see how distinctly this very idea is expressed in the well-known passage of Plutarch concerning Numa’s legislation of the trade-colleges:⁠—“And through this,” Plutarch wrote, “he was the first to banish from the city this spirit which led people to say: ‘I am a Sabine,’ or ‘I am a Roman,’ or ‘I am a subject of Tatius,’ and another: ‘I am a subject of Romulus’ ”⁠—to exclude, in other words, the idea of different descent. <a href="appendix.xhtml#noteref-321" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-322" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The work of <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Schurtz, devoted to the “age-classes” and the secret men’s unions during the barbarian stases of civilization (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Altersklassen und Männerverbände: eine Darstellung der Grundformen der Gesellschaft</i>, Berlin, 1902), which reaches me while I am reading the proofs of these pages, contains numbers of facts in support of the above hypothesis concerning the origin of guilds. The art of building a large communal house, so as not to offend the spirits of the fallen trees; the art of forging metals, so as to conciliate the hostile spirits; the secrets of hunting and of the ceremonies and mask-dances which render it successful; the art of teaching savage arts to boys; the secret ways of warding off the witchcraft of enemies and, consequently, the art of warfare; the making of boats, of nets for fishing, of traps for animals, and of snares for birds, and finally the women’s arts of weaving and dyeing⁠—all these were in olden times as many “artifices” and “crafts,” which required secrecy for being effective. Consequently, they were transmitted from the earliest times, in secret societies, or “mysteries,” to those only who had undergone a painful initiation. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Schurtz shows now that savage life is honeycombed with secret societies and “clubs” (of warriors, of hunters), which have as ancient an origin as the marriage “classes” in the clans, and contain already all the elements of the future guild: secrecy, independence from the family and sometimes the clan, common worship of special gods, common meals, jurisdiction within the society and brotherhood. The forge and the boathouse are, in fact, usual dependencies of the men’s clubs; and the “long houses” or “palavers” are built by special craftsmen who know how to conjure the spirits of the fallen trees. <a href="appendix.xhtml#noteref-322" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
